Guillermo Bustos-Pérez $^{1,2,3}$, Andreu Olle $^{2,3}$

<div align="justify">

## Abstract

The surface of lithic stone tools from Paleolithic archaeological sites
can suffer different postdepositional alterations, such as sedimentary
erosion induced by water displacement or wind. The surface of flint
artifacts can record these alterations as changes in the texture.
Microscopic analysis and grayscale images can be employed to obtain
quantitative data to help determine the degree of alteration undergone
by the surface of a flint stone tool. However, surface quantitative
values depend directly on the image capturing system of each microscope.
This raises the question regarding if the quantitative values are
actually capturing the evolution of a surface, if they are dependent on
the type of microscope and its image capturing system, and if the
detection of the degree of abrasion will vary depending on the type of
microscope. The present work sets to determine if data extracted from
images from two different microscopes show the same trends in surface
change when postdepositional alterations occur. Surface photographs of a
sample of 25 flakes were taken using a Dino-Lite Edge 3.0 AM73915MZT and
a 3D Optical Profiler Sensofar S neox 090. These flakes represented
three different stages of alteration (fresh, ten hours of experimentally
induced sedimentary erosion, and geological neocortex). Results of
quantitative values from grayscale level images indicate that, despite
providing different numeric ranges, quantitative values from images of
both types of microscopes reflect the same trends in surface change. The
classification accuracy of the three stages of slurry erosion did not
vary between microscopes.

**Key words**: microscopic analysis; lithic analysis; lithic taphonomy;
post-depositional surface modifications

## Introduction

Flint stone tools are some of the most common remains from Paleolithic
sites. They provide information about chrono-cultural developments along
with the behavioral and spatial organization of Paleolithic groups.
However, stone tools from Paleolithic sites might suffer a series of
postdepositional alterations, with water flow or wind abrasion being
some of the most common ([Byers et al., 2015](#ref-byers_flake_2015);
[Hosfield and Chambers, 2016](#ref-hosfield_flake_2016); [Michel et al.,
2019](#ref-michel_freezing_2019); [Petraglia and Potts,
1994](#ref-petraglia_water_1994); [Schick,
1986](#ref-schick_stone_1986)). These postdepositional alterations can
disrupt archaeological remains, resulting in horizontal and vertical
mixing of artifacts, with on unreliable chrono-cultural interpretations.
As a result of this, a good analysis of lithic assemblage integrity is
needed prior to its interpretation.

On stone tools, postdepositional alterations and their intensity are
recorded on the surface, with increasing ridge width and surface
abrasion being two of the most common features observed ([Burroni et
al., 2002](#ref-burroni_surface_2002); [Bustos-Pérez et al.,
2019](#ref-bustos-perez_experimental_2019); [Bustos-Pérez and Ollé,
2024](#ref-bustos-perez_quantification_2024); [Chambers,
2016](#ref-chambers_like_2016);
[**article?**](#ref-article){shackley_stream_1974). Unaided visual
assessments of sedimentary abrasion (rounding) can result in an error
ratio above 80%, indicating the need for microscope assistance through
quantitative variables ([Chambers, 2016](#ref-chambers_like_2016)).

Quantitative characterization of surfaces is an important part of
different lithic microscopic analytical approaches. Recent traceological
studies commonly use surface texture quantification for the
identification of worked materials ([Evans and Donahue,
2008](#ref-evans_laser_2008); [Ibáñez et al.,
2019](#ref-ibanez_identifying_2019); [Ibáñez and Mazzucco,
2021](#ref-ibanez_quantitative_2021); [Macdonald,
2014](#ref-macdonald_application_2014); [Sferrazza,
2023](#ref-sferrazza_grey_2023); [Stemp and Chung,
2011](#ref-stemp_discrimination_2011); [Stevens et al.,
2010](#ref-stevens_practical_2010)), or for testing different models of
polish development ([Ibáñez and Mazzucco,
2021](#ref-ibanez_quantitative_2021)). Another area of lithic
microscopic analysis were surface quantification plays a key role is the
identification, characterization and estimation of the intensity of
post-depositional alterations on lithic artefacts ([Burroni et al.,
2002](#ref-burroni_surface_2002); [Bustos-Pérez et al.,
2019](#ref-bustos-perez_experimental_2019); [Caux et al.,
2018](#ref-caux_aspects_2018); [Chambers,
2016](#ref-chambers_like_2016); [Chu et al.,
2015](#ref-chu_micro-abrasion_2015); [Hiscock,
1985](#ref-hiscock_need_1985); [Hosfield et al.,
2000](#ref-hosfield_interpreting_2000); [Levi Sala,
1986](#ref-levi_sala_use_1986)). The development of these analysis has
been incorporated to studies focusing on the integrity of lithic
artefacts present at archaeological assemblages ([Fraile-Márquez et al.,
2022](#ref-fraile-marquez_facing_2022); [Galland et al.,
2019](#ref-galland_quantifying_2019); [Staurset et al.,
2023](#ref-staurset_post-depositional_2023)).

Recent approaches using sequential experimentation, grayscale images
([Bustos-Pérez and Ollé, 2024](#ref-bustos-perez_quantification_2024);
[Sferrazza, 2023](#ref-sferrazza_grey_2023)) and texture metrics
([Haralick et al., 1973](#ref-haralick_textural_1973)) have shown the
possibility of quantifying the surface changes due to sedimentary
abrasion on flint stone tools. However, the information contained in the
pixels of a photograph might vary, depending on the capturing system of
each microscope. This rises the issue of “microscope agnosticism” (the
quality of metric values or trends to be invariant to the choice of
microscope). In the present study, four aspects are explored to address
the issue of microscope agnosticism in sedimentary abrasion.

## References

</div>

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
entry-spacing="0">

<div id="ref-burroni_surface_2002" class="csl-entry">

Burroni, D., Donahue, R.E., Pollard, A.M., 2002. The Surface Alteration
Features of Flint Artefacts as a Record of Environmental Processes.
Journal of Archaeological Science 29, 1277–1287.
<https://doi.org/10.1006/jasc.2001.0771>

</div>

<div id="ref-bustos-perez_experimental_2019" class="csl-entry">

Bustos-Pérez, G., Díaz, S., Baena, J., 2019. An Experimental Approach to
Degrees of Rounding Among Lithic Artifacts. Journal of Archaeological
Method and Theory 26, 1243–1275.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-018-9409-8>

</div>

<div id="ref-bustos-perez_quantification_2024" class="csl-entry">

Bustos-Pérez, G., Ollé, A., 2024. The quantification of surface abrasion
on flint stone tools. Archaeometry 66, 247–265.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/arcm.12913>

</div>

<div id="ref-byers_flake_2015" class="csl-entry">

Byers, D.A., Hargiss, E., Finley, J.B., 2015. Flake Morphology, Fluvial
Dynamics, and Debitage Transport Potential. Geoarchaeology 30, 379–392.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/gea.21524>

</div>

<div id="ref-caux_aspects_2018" class="csl-entry">

Caux, S., Galland, A., Queffelec, A., Bordes, J.-G., 2018. Aspects and
characterization of chert alteration in an archaeological context: A
qualitative to quantitative pilot study. Journal of Archaeological
Science: Reports 20, 210–219.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2018.04.027>

</div>

<div id="ref-chambers_like_2016" class="csl-entry">

Chambers, J.C., 2016. [Like a rolling stone? The identification of
fluvial transportation damage signatures on secondary context
bifaces](http://journal.lithics.org/wp-content/uploads/Lithics_24_2003_Chambers_66_77.pdf).
Lithics 24, 66–77.

</div>

<div id="ref-chu_micro-abrasion_2015" class="csl-entry">

Chu, W., Thompson, C., Hosfield, R., 2015. Micro-abrasion of flint
artifacts by mobile sediments: A taphonomic approach. Archaeological and
Anthropological Sciences 7, 3–11.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-013-0157-0>

</div>

<div id="ref-evans_laser_2008" class="csl-entry">

Evans, A.A., Donahue, R.E., 2008. Laser scanning confocal microscopy: A
potential technique for the study of lithic microwear. Journal of
Archaeological Science 35, 2223–2230.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2008.02.006>

</div>

<div id="ref-fraile-marquez_facing_2022" class="csl-entry">

Fraile-Márquez, C., Diez-Martín, F., Duque-Martínez, J., Uribelarrea,
D., Sánchez-Yustos, P., Francisco, S. de, Baquedano, E., Mabulla, A.,
Domínguez-Rodrigo, M., 2022. Facing the palimpsest conundrum: An
archaeo-stratigraphic approach to the intra-site analysis of SHK
Extension (Bed II, Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania). Archaeological and
Anthropological Sciences 14, 230.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-022-01691-3>

</div>

<div id="ref-galland_quantifying_2019" class="csl-entry">

Galland, A., Queffelec, A., Caux, S., Bordes, J.-G., 2019. Quantifying
lithic surface alterations using confocal microscopy and its relevance
for exploring the Châtelperronian at La Roche-à-Pierrot (Saint-Césaire,
France). Journal of Archaeological Science 104, 45–55.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2019.01.009>

</div>

<div id="ref-haralick_textural_1973" class="csl-entry">

Haralick, R.M., Shanmugam, K., Dinstein, I.H., 1973. [Textural features
for image
classification](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4309314/).
IEEE Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics 610–621.

</div>

<div id="ref-hiscock_need_1985" class="csl-entry">

Hiscock, P., 1985. The Need for a Taphonomic Perspective in Stone
Artefact Analysis. Queensland Archaeological Research 2, 82–95.

</div>

<div id="ref-hosfield_flake_2016" class="csl-entry">

Hosfield, R.T., Chambers, J.C., 2016. [Flake modifications during
fluvial transportation: Three cautionary
tales](http://journal.lithics.org/wp-content/uploads/Lithics_24_2003_Hosfield_Chambers_57_65.pdf).
Lithics 24, 57–65.

</div>

<div id="ref-hosfield_interpreting_2000" class="csl-entry">

Hosfield, R.T., Chambers, J.C., Macklin, M., Brewer, P., Sear, D., 2000.
[Interpreting secondary context’sites’: A role for experimental
archaeology](http://eprints.lincoln.ac.uk/id/eprint/33656/). Lithics 21,
29–35.

</div>

<div id="ref-ibanez_identifying_2019" class="csl-entry">

Ibáñez, J.J., Lazuen, T., González-Urquijo, J., 2019. Identifying
Experimental Tool Use Through Confocal Microscopy. Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory 26, 1176–1215.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-018-9408-9>

</div>

<div id="ref-ibanez_quantitative_2021" class="csl-entry">

Ibáñez, J.J., Mazzucco, N., 2021. Quantitative use-wear analysis of
stone tools: Measuring how the intensity of use affects the
identification of the worked material. PLOS ONE 16, e0257266.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0257266>

</div>

<div id="ref-levi_sala_use_1986" class="csl-entry">

Levi Sala, I., 1986. Use Wear and Post-depositional Surface
Modification: A Word of Caution. Journal of Archaeological Science 13,
229–244.

</div>

<div id="ref-macdonald_application_2014" class="csl-entry">

Macdonald, D.A., 2014. The application of focus variation microscopy for
lithic use-wear quantification. Journal of Archaeological Science 48,
26–33. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2013.10.003>

</div>

<div id="ref-michel_freezing_2019" class="csl-entry">

Michel, M., Cnuts, D., Rots, V., 2019. Freezing in-sight: The effect of
frost cycles on use-wear and residues on flint tools. Archaeological and
Anthropological Sciences 11, 5423–5443.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-019-00881-w>

</div>

<div id="ref-petraglia_water_1994" class="csl-entry">

Petraglia, M.D., Potts, R., 1994. Water Flow and the Formation of Early
Pleistocene Artifact Sites in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 13, 228–254.
<https://doi.org/10.1006/jaar.1994.1014>

</div>

<div id="ref-schick_stone_1986" class="csl-entry">

Schick, K.D., 1986. Stone Age Sites in the Making. Experiments in the
Formation and Transformation of Archaeological Occurrences, BAR
International Series. Oxford.

</div>

<div id="ref-sferrazza_grey_2023" class="csl-entry">

Sferrazza, P., 2023. Grey level co-occurrence matrix and learning
algorithms to quantify and classify use-wear on experimental flint
tools. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 48, 103869.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2023.103869>

</div>

<div id="ref-staurset_post-depositional_2023" class="csl-entry">

Staurset, S., Coulson, S.D., Mothulatshipi, S., Burrough, S.L., Nash,
D.J., Thomas, D.S.G., 2023. Post-depositional disturbance and spatial
organization at exposed open-air sites: Examples from the Middle Stone
Age of the Makgadikgadi Basin, Botswana. Quaternary Science Reviews 301,
107824. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2022.107824>

</div>

<div id="ref-stemp_discrimination_2011" class="csl-entry">

Stemp, W.J., Chung, S., 2011. Discrimination of surface wear on obsidian
tools using LSCM and RelA: Pilot study results (area‐scale analysis of
obsidian tool surfaces). Scanning 33, 279–293.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/sca.20250>

</div>

<div id="ref-stevens_practical_2010" class="csl-entry">

Stevens, N.E., Harro, D.R., Hicklin, A., 2010. Practical quantitative
lithic use-wear analysis using multiple classifiers. Journal of
Archaeological Science 37, 2671–2678.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2010.06.004>

</div>

</div>
